# Teak

Teak is a CLI utility to generate a Markdown reference documentation for PHP projects (optimized for WordPress).

It can generate documentation for

- Reference pages for your classes and global functions that follow the [WordPress PHP Documentation Standards](https://make.wordpress.org/core/handbook/best-practices/inline-documentation-standards/php/)
- Reference for WordPress action and filters hooks that follow the [Inline Documentation Standards for Actions and Filters](https://make.wordpress.org/core/handbook/best-practices/inline-documentation-standards/php/#4-hooks-actions-and-filters).

You can use documentation generated by Teak to create a documentation website when you use it in combination with a static site generator.

Teak is used to generate the [documentation for Timber](https://github.com/timber/docs), which uses [Hugo](http://gohugo.io/) as a static site generator.

## Installation

You can install the package with Composer:

```bash
composer require timber/teak --dev
```

## CLI Usage

### Generate a class reference

When you pass a folder to the Class Reference Generator, it will generate a separate Markdown file for each class that it finds.

**Use a folder as the input**

```bash
vendor/bin/teak generate:class-reference ./lib/ --output ./docs/reference
```

This searches all the PHP classes in `./lib/` and outputs the Markdown files into `./docs/reference`.

**Use a single file**

```bash
vendor/bin/teak generate:class-reference ./lib/Post.php --output ./docs/reference
```

### Generate a function reference

The Function Reference Generator will search all the files for global functions and output them in a single Markdown file. 

```bash
vendor/bin/teak generate:function-reference ./lib/ --output ./docs/
```

### Generate a hook reference

The Hook Reference Generator will search all the files for WordPress actions or filters and outputs one single Markdown file, with all the hooks found.

```bash
vendor/bin/teak generate:hook-reference ./lib --output ./docs/hooks --hook_type=filter
vendor/bin/teak generate:hook-reference ./lib --output ./docs/hooks --hook_type=action
```

#### Options

- `--hook_type` – The hook type to look for. Has to be either `filter` or `action`.
- `--hook_prefix` – Hook prefix (to select only hooks with a certain prefix).

### Global options

Display help for commands

```bash
vendor/bin/teak generate:class-reference -h
vendor/bin/teak generate:function-reference -h
vendor/bin/teak generate:hook-reference -h
```

#### File options

- `--file_name` – File Name (the .md extension is appended automatically)
- `--file_prefix` - File Prefix
- `--file_title` - File Title (Heading 1 in the Markdown document). Only applicable to hooks and functions reference.

#### Front Matter options

Teak can generate Front Matter Blocks that you will use if you use the generated Markdown files to generate a website using a static site generator.

- `--front_matter_style` –  Front Matter type. Currently, only "YAML" is supported (Will output a Heading 1 if not provided).
- `--front_matter_parent` – The parent string to use for the Front Matter block. Default: `reference`.

## DocBlocks

Teak works best if you follow the [WordPress PHP Documentation Standards](https://make.wordpress.org/core/handbook/best-practices/inline-documentation-standards/php/). Because the documentation renders to Markdown, you *can* use Markdown syntax in your DocBlocks.

### Ignoring Structural Elements

An element (class, method, property) is **ignored when one of the following conditions** applies:

- No DocBlock is provided
- No `@api` tag is present
- An `@ignore` tag is present
- An `@internal` tag is present
- The visibility is `private` (applies to methods only)

This means that for Markdown files to be generated for a class at all, you’ll need at least a DocBlock, with an `@api` tag.

```php
/**
 * Class My_Public_Class
 *
 * @api
 */
class My_Public_Class {}
```

### Special Tags

#### @example

The `@example` tag allows you add code examples to your DocBlocks, including fenced code blocks:

```php
/**
 * Function summary.
 * 
 * Function description.
 *
 * @api
 * @example
 *
 * Optional text to describe the example
 * 
 * ```php
 * my_method( 'example', false );
 * ```
 *
 * @param string $param1 Description. Default 'value'.
 * @param bool   $param2 Description. Default true.
 */
function my_method( $param1 = 'value', $param2 = true ) {}
```

#### Parameters that are arrays

Teak supports [parameters that are arrays](https://make.wordpress.org/core/handbook/best-practices/inline-documentation-standards/php/#1-1-parameters-that-are-arrays).

### Hook Variations

Sometimes you’ll have two hooks that follow each other and do basically the same, but allow you to make the hook apply only on certain conditions:

```php
/**
 * Fires on a specific processing status.
 * 
 * The status can be one of the following: `success`, `error` or `fail`.
 */
do_action( "myplugin/process/status/{$status}" );
do_action( "myplugin/process/status/{$status}/{$action}" );
```

In this example, you’d have a variable `$status` and an `$action`. The first action is triggered when you use it with a certain status, the second action would be triggered if you use a certain status and a certain action. Teak will list these hook variations under the same hook. Because of this, you only need to define a DocBlock for the first hook.

## Limitations

This compiler is not a full implementation of phpDocumentor. Rather, it tries to make code documentation that follows the [WordPress PHP Documentation Standards](https://make.wordpress.org/core/handbook/best-practices/inline-documentation-standards/php/) more readable, and less techy. Not all [official tags](https://make.wordpress.org/core/handbook/best-practices/inline-documentation-standards/php/#phpdoc-tags) are considered yet.

## Contributing

Contributions are very welcome.

## Roadmap

- CLI: accept a list of files.
- Support nested array arguments
- Add support for [Inline Tags](http://docs.phpdoc.org/references/phpdoc/inline-tags/index.html).
- Add tests.
- Optimize linking between Markdown documents.
